DR SUSAN CALVIN
I looked at my notes and I didn't like them. I'd spent three days at the United States Robots Company, its offices and factories like a small city, and I needed more personal information for my newspaper. And so I went to interview Dr Calvin.
Susan Calvin had been born in the year 1982. At the age of twenty she had met Dr Alfred banning of US Robots who had shown her the first robot with a voice. It was a large, clumsy, ugly robot which was going to be sent to the mines on Mercury.
Susan was a cold girl, plain and colourless, who disliked the world around her. But as she watched and listened to the robot, she felt the beginning of a cold excitement. In 2008 she completed her final degree at Columbia University, and began work at US Robots as the first robot psychologist.
For fifty years she watched the development of robots — and now she was leaving US Robots at the age of seventy-five.
'My newspaper reaches the whole solar system,' I said to Dr Calvin. 'We have three billion readers, Dr Calvin. They would like to hear your views on robots.'
Dr Calvin didn't smile at me. I don't think she ever smiled. She was small and thin and her eyes were sharp, though not angry.
I, Robot
Dr Susan Calvin

'How old are you?' she wanted to know.
'Thirty-two,' I said.
'Then you don't remember a world without robots,' Dr Calvin began. 'There was a time when human beings faced the world alone and without a friend. Now we have robots to help us - stronger, more useful, more capable than we are. Human beings are no longer alone. Have you ever thought of it that way?'
'I'm afraid I haven't.'
'To you, a robot is a robot. Made by humans and, if necessary, destroyed by humans. But you haven't worked with them, so you don't know them. They're cleaner, better creatures than we are. In the beginning, of course, robots couldn't talk. Afterwards, they became more human. But it took US Robots a long time. The first robots sent out to Mercury failed. If you want to know about the second expedition, young man, I advise you to visit Gregory Powell. He's still living in New York — he's a grandfather now. But in those days he and Michael Donovan were the engineers who were given our most difficult cases.'
'I can visit Mr Powell later,' I agreed. 'But please tell me what you remember now.'
She spread her thin hands on her desk and looked at them. 'There are two or three of their cases that I know about,' she said.
'Start with Mercury,' I suggested.
'Well, I think that the Second Mercury Expedition was sent out in 2015. It consisted of two engineers - Gregory Powell and Michael Donovan — and a new robot, the SPD robot ...'
'Then you don't remember a world without robots.' 4
